UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770722 Date: 02/13/2016
RELEASE IN FULL

From: Sent: To: Cc:
Subject:

Crowley, Philip J <CrowleyR1@state.gov> Sunday, July 25, 2010 6:20 PM
Mills, Cheryl D; Sullivan, Jacob J; Reines, Philippe I; McHale, Judith A; Verma, Richard R; Kennedy, Patrick F Wikileaks

Madame Secretary, we have seen in the past hour release of stories on three outlets -- the New York Times, Guardian and der Spiegel --that summarize military documents about the campaign in Pakistan and Afghanistan. We have had several meetings and calls anticipating these stories. The good news is that they don't appear to reveal anything that is not publicly known or understood. Also, the documents detail what occurred between 2006 and 2009, prior to our revised strategy. So far, no documents originate with the State Department. They are mostly field level reports and of uncertain veracity, which the media openly acknowledge. The White House answered three questions for the NYT yesterday -- about the difficulty of the campaign, ISI complicity with the Taliban and the potential impact of the leaks -- and just issued a statement condemning the leaks as endangering sources and methods. I anticipate that our greatest challenge will come tomorrow as the Afghans and Pakistanis react to this. As Judith has mentioned in our conversations over the past couple of days, on both sides of the border, there will be strong suspicions that this was a deliberate leak. We have cued up posts overseas with top line points and they are closely monitoring the overseas reaction. In addition, as we head towards Congressional testimony this week, there will be significant questions about what kind of partner Pakistan is. Our posture will be that Pakistan has in recent months turned a corner as it understands that the insurgency is a risk to Pakistan itself, but that more needs to be done. But this will definitely challenge our public posture of progress made through the strategic dialogue and Kabul Conference. Pat, Rich and I will update you again following an 8 a.m. SVTS.
PJ

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05770722 Date: 02/13/2016

