UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781778 Date: 02/13/2016
RELEASE IN PART B5

From: Sent: To: Subject:

Mills, Cheryl D <MillsCD@state.gov> Thursday, August 4, 2011 9:51 PM
FW: Read-out from Pelosi meeting earlier today

From: Roth, Richard A Sent: Thursday, August 04, 2011 4:33 PM To: Mills, Cheryl D; Carl Yoder, Samantha A Subject: Read-out from Pelosi meeting earlier today
Cheryl,

Richard
Readout of USAID Administrator Shah's Briefing of Leader Pelosi, House Members on Horn of Africa Drought, Thursday, August 4, 2011
Members present: Leader Pelosi, Reps. DeLauro, Lowey, McGovern, Payne, Honda, Markey, Crowley, Van Holien, Moran and Cohen. (Senate Majority Leader Reid stopped in for a brief moment atteader Pelosi's request.)
From the Administration: Administrator Shah, AA/DCHA Nancy Lindborg, State PDAS/AFR Don Yamamoto, USAID COS Margie Sullivan, DAA/LPA Barbara Feinstein, State/H Dottie Rayburn
Leader Pelosi opened with a discussion of the present situation and recognized Rep. Payne to deliver a prayer on behalf of those suffering in the Horn of Africa.
Dr. Shah opened by showing a set of photographs taken during his most recent trip. His presentation outlined the challenges and current situation, the assistance USAID has provided -- both beforehand, which has helped to save lives -- and currently. He mentioned Feed the Future, and presented the challenges as time, access, and security. Addressing concerns some in Congress have raised about the possibility of assistance being diverted and inadvertently going into AS hands, he underscored the White House's commitment to saving lives as a central piece of our counter-terrorism strategy and in underscoring a narrative whereby the United States is on the side of those suffering at the hands of AS. In response to what Members can do, Dr. Shah highlighted concerns around the budget (namely the recent HACFO budget which would decimate USAID operations and programming in a variety of sectors); and asked for help rallying Somali and other affected diaspora communities in the United States.
Member questions / comments were as follows: what are other donors, including the Saudis and the Chinese, doing (Lowey and Moran); what is the intersection between the current situation and climate change (Markey); why don't we "carpet-bomb" food aid in Somalia (Crowley); what legal protections from prosecution are available to American NGOs who provide non-USG assistance in Somalia (McGovern); need to work on the national security argument for aid now that USAID (and State) are in the security discretionary basket in the debt ceiling package (Van Hollen); vaccination/immunization programs (VanHollen); and how can USAID get money -- perhaps through AFRICOM -- in the defense budget (Moran).
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781778 Date: 02/13/2016

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781778 Date: 02/13/2016
Follow-up from the meeting is as follows:  McGovern will organize a bipartisan letter from Members to the Secretary / Administrator addressing the AS issue (We are to work with his staff (Cindy Buhl) on it);  Members will form a working group on this topic (Rosa De Lauro's office will lead);  Members will work to bring added visibility to the issue through special orders; organizing a CODEL to the region; hosting joint press conferences with NGOs ;  Leader Pelosi will raise with POTUS and encourage him to make a public statement on this;  Diaspora engagement: USAID Is to put together a list of where the Somali and other affected diaspora communities are located in the United States; Members will assist in facilitating meetings with these communities in their districts;  The Administrator was encouraged to meet with House Appropriations Ranking Member Norm Dicks.
**********
From: Stivers, Jonathan [mallto:Jonathan.Stivers@mail.house.gov] Sent: Thursday, August 04, 2011 4:03 PM Subject: PELOSI -- Statement on the Drought & Famine in the Horn of Africa

NEWS FROM DEMOCRATIC LEADER NANCY PELOSI
WWW.DEMOCRAT1CLEADER.GOV

August 4, 2011

Contact: Nadeam Elshami/Drew Hammill, 202-226-7616

Pelosi Statement on the Drought & Famine in the Horn of Africa

Washington, D.C. -- Today, Leader Nancy Pelosi and her colleagues in the House of Representatives met with USAID Administrator Dr. Raj Shah to discuss the drought and famine in the Horn of Africa region. Members attending the meeting were Reps. Steve Cohen (TN), Joseph Crowley (NY), Rosa DeLauro (CT), Mike Honda (CA), Nita Lowey (NY), Ed Markey (MA), Jim McGovern (MA), Jim Moran (VA), Donald Payne (NJ), and Chris Van Hollen (MD). Below is a statement from Leader Pelosi following the meeting:

"Today, my colleagues and I had the opportunity to meet with USAID Administrator Dr. Raj Shah to discuss the drought and famine in the Horn of Africa and the steps the U.S. and the international community are taking to address the crisis. We began our meeting with a prayer for the men, women, and children of the region who are suffering from this humanitarian catastrophe of immense proportions.

"The drought and famine in the Horn of Africa is a challenge to the conscience of leaders around the world, and the United States and the international community must do more. We can begin by providing financial and vocal support to organizations taking risks in getting food, health services, and humanitarian assistance to the most vulnerable; other members of the international community, including China and Saudi Arabia, must also step up their efforts.

"The American people can be proud that U.S. assistance has already saved lives and has provided stability in many areas. Our long-term assistance has provided a safety net in Ethiopia and Kenya that is making a significant difference.

"In the coming weeks and months, my colleagues and I will work with the Obama Administration to ensure strong U.S. support for the effort to prevent hunger, starvation, and instability in the Horn of Africa region."
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781778 Date: 02/13/2016

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781778 Date: 02/13/2016

This email is UNCLASSIFIED.

# ##

This email is UNCLASSIFIED.

SBU This email is UNCLASSIFIED.
Press release link: http://www.democraticleader.govinews/press?id=2285 Democraticleader.gov --Twitter --YouTube -- Flickr -- Facebook --The Gavel

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05781778 Date: 02/13/2016

