UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766268 Date: 02/13/2016 RELEASE IN FULL

From: Sent: To: Subject:

Hormats, Robert D <HormatsRD@state.gov> Saturday, December 19, 2009 6:22 PM
Report on the Goldman case and GSP

Thanks to the persistent efforts of our charge' in Brasilia, I was finally able to locate and call my counterpart, Under secretary Pedro Mendonca.
I made the points contained in your email to me -- and emphasized the seriousness of the issue and Sen. Lautenberg's frustration that despite the Mr. Goldman's victories in court, he is still unable to get his son back. I said that Lautenberg had told you that in light of this, he was continuing his hold on the GSP legislation -- which, if it continues, would harm Brazil and every other developing nation.
Pedro will speak to the acting foreign minister and other authorities in Brazil right now -- and will get back to me with an update and an assessment of what more can be done.
I have also spoken with my USTR counterpart Demetrios Marantis throughout the day. They have discussed this matter with the Brazilian charge' in DC. They had also organized the meeting between him and Lautenberg that Craig mentioned to you in his email -- hoping that it would lead to a lifting of the hold. Demetrios will consult with Ron Kirk to decide what more to do.
I will email you again as soon as I hear from Brasilia and/or USTR.
And I will continue to coordinate with Craig.
Bob
Original Message From: H <HDR22@clintonemail.com> To: Hormats, Robert D; Kelly, Craig A Cc: Sullivan, Jacob .1 Sent: Sat Dec 19 15:52:57 2009 Subject: Call with Sen. Lautenberg
I spoke w the Senator who is not ready to lift his hold yet. He spoke w the Charge in the Brazilian Embassy who told him there was a procedure in the Brazilian courts that could be used to give Mr. Goldman custody now and during the remaining time of the court proceedings.
Craig, can you find out what the Brazilians meant by that and if their govt is pursuing it?
Bob, can you and USTR contact your Brazilian counterparts to explain how important the Goldman case is to the Senator who can't understand how the father wins every case but never gets his son back and he has run out of patience and is willing to hold this critical bill.
Let me know what you find out. Thanks.

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05766268 Date: 02/13/2016

