UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784688 Date: 02/13/2016

From: Sent: To: Subject:

Campbell, Kurt M <CampbelIKM@state.gov> Tuesday, October 25, 2011 8:11 PM H; Sullivan, Jacob J Burma update and an idea -- close hold

RELEASE IN PART B5

Madame Secretary --
I have just left Indonesia on the way to Singapore Manila and Korea. Derek Mitchell and members of my team just left Rangoon. Primary purpose of our dual visits are to advance preparations for EAS and take preliminary steps on planning for potential December 1 stop. Both the Leader and the Lady supportive and government offered that further steps will be taken in next four weeks that will further political easing and reform. I judge that we are on course for an historic trip and opening; we will brief Jake and Huma on Thursday on all aspects of our planning. I briefed Danny Russell on Friday night last week and walked him through the detailed planning and positions we have developed for the initiative and he is supportive. More on all of this later and we have prepared memos for your use with WH on every aspect of initiative.
I am starting to think a few moves ahead and wanted to float an unconventional idea by you both. I freely acknowledge that it needs more careful consideration but I at least am intrigued by the possibilities and think it worthy of your consideration.
One of the things we have discussed as a deliverable for an improved relationship will be an exchange of ambassadors. This matters deeply to their side but we of course face several thorny procedural and political challenges moving ahead with this. We also need to recognize that the next phase requires a powerhouse to move things and motivate.

A few final things. The Foreign Policy piece is a Grand Slam in Asia and among the strategist class. Huge. We are putting together a detailed collection of responses we have received to date. Please both of you read the long FT piece on Burma Tuesday. Excellent reporting from the scene about how to think about recent developments on the ground there.
Jake see you for our briefing on Thursday.
Best Kurt

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784688 Date: 02/13/2016

