UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784125 Date: 02/13/2016

RELEASE IN PART B6

From: Sent: To: Subject:

Sullivan, Jacob J <SullivanJJ@state.gov> Thursday, December 1, 2011 7:24 AM
FW: Eritrea: Readout of today's SC activity on sanctions

FYI

From: Ryu, Rexon Y

Sent: Thursday, December 01, 2011 10:15 AM

To: Burns, William J; Sherman, Wendy R; Sullivan, Jacob 3; 'Denis_R._McDonough

'Kristie_A._Canegallb

Zeya, Uzra S; Elliott, Maria B

Cc: Rice, Susan E (USUN); Graff, Corinne

Subject: Fw: Eritrea: Readout of today's SC activity on sanctions

Update on eritrea UNSCR is below. Vote is now scheduled for Monday with text essentially unchanged.

From: Graff, Corinne

Sent: Wednesday, November 30, 2011 09:44 PM

To: Brimmer, Esther D; Pittman, H Dean; Holt, Victoria K; Carson, Johnnie; Yamamoto, Donald Y;

'Adam.Szubin

'Harris, Grant'

'Samantha]._Power

McLeod, Mary; Fernandez, Jose W; Reifman,

Joel R (Asmara); Gration, Jonathan S; Booth, Donald E; Lanier, Jerry P (Kampala); Pasi, Geeta

Cc: Rice, Susan E (USUN); Ryu, Rexon Y; DeLaurentis, Jeffrey A; Grant, William K (USUN); Ahmed, Salman (USUN);

Donegan, James E (USUN); USUN-SANCTIONS-Group

Subject: FW: Eritrea: Readout of today's SC activity on sanctions

Colleagues,

Please see the below readout of the discussions today in New York on the Eritrea draft UNSCR.

Many thanks,

Corinne

Corinne Graff Policy Advisor U.S. Mission to the United Nations (202) 736-7555 www.usun.state.gov GraffC@state.gov

Readout of November 30 Security Council Discussions on Eritrea

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784125 Date: 02/13/2016

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784125 Date: 02/13/2016
After lengthy Security Council discussions, Gabon -- the principal sponsor of the new UNSCR to impose sanctions on Eritrea -- decided not to call for a vote this evening, as originally planned, but rather to delay adoption until Monday December 5.
During morning Security Council consultations on the draft UNSCR, several delegations said that they needed more time to digest recent changes to the text. Russia/China made clear that if the UNSCR were brought to a vote today, they would veto it on "technical" procedural grounds (i.e., rather than for reasons of substance). South Africa further complained that the Council had not adequately considered its amendments, which South Africa had only given to Gabon the night before. In light of these concerns and without withdrawing its request for a vote later this evening, Gabon agreed to convene an experts meeting at noon to review the South African amendments and other feedback. Gabon made clear that they were unwilling to accept any substantive amendments to the text "in blue", although they might accommodate cosmetic changes to show good faith.
As anticipated, South Africa, China and Russia used the experts meeting to seek deletion of key provisions. Gabon, supported by the P-3 and Germany, pushed back against these amendments, but signaled an openness to a few cosmetic edits. The UK also proposed a few purely technical changes to correct drafting mistakes.
After the experts' negotiation, the Council held afternoon consultations to discuss the way forward. Gabon announced that they would be willing to delay a vote until Monday December 5 -- but no longer -- in the interests of goodwill and harmony and to give delegations more time. Gabon further explained that they intended to circulate a slightly modified text later this evening that reflected only cosmetic changes from the experts' discussion.
The Council then had a long discussion on the timing and procedure for a vote, with South Africa -- supported less robustly by Russia and China -- attempting to postpone a vote indefinitely. Gabon held firm and said the vote would be held Monday. Gabon won sympathy from some other delegations who were grateful for the extra time, making South Africa appear even more isolated and inflexible. The Council agreed to the Gabonese plan for a Monday vote.
The Council also discussed Eritrean President Isaias's repeated request to address the Council. Some Council members argued that such a meeting (originally requested in late October) should occur just before adoption of the UNSCR. Amb. Rice reiterated our view that such a meeting would be redundant and counterproductive, but added that in light of the overwhelming support of Council members for such a meeting, the United States could not block such a decision (a procedural matter to which the veto does not apply) and would fulfill its host country obligations to grant Isaias entry. The Council President said that he will therefore extend an invitation to Isaias and other heads of state in the region (Ethiopia, Uganda, Djibouti, Kenya, Somalia) to meet with the Council at 10:00 a.m. on Monday December 5. A vote on the sanctions UNSCR will occur after this meeting, no later than 3:00 p.m. Monday.
USUN will circulate the slightly edited text to Washington as soon as we receive it. It will not contain any substantive changes.
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05784125 Date: 02/13/2016

