UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794298 Date: 02/13/2016

From: Sent: To: Subject

RELEASE IN PART B5,B6
H <hrod17@clintonemail.com > Wednesday, April 18, 2012 7:08 AM 'sullivanij@state.gov' Re: PAKISTAN - Press of Interest: DCC seeks more US assurances before restoring NATO supplies

From: Sullivan, Jacob 3 [mailto:Sullivan33@state.gov] Sent: Wednesday, April 18, 2012 06:26 AM To: H Subject: Fw: PAKISTAN - Press of Interest: DCC seeks more US assurances before restoring NATO supplies
FYI
From: McDonough, Denis R. [mailto Sent: Wednesday, April 18, 2012 06:19 AM To: Burns, William 3; Nides, Thomas R; Sullivan, Jacob 3 Subject: Fw: PAKISTAN - Press of Interest: DCC seeks more US assurances before restoring NATO supplies

From: Barber, Katharine Sent: Wednesday, April 18, 2012 04:52 AM To: #AFPAK; #DEFENSE; #MULTILAT Cc: #WHSR; DL-OVP-National Security; DL-WHO-Press; #INTEL Subject: PAKISTAN - Press of Interest: DCC seeks more US assurances before restoring NATO supplies
DCC seeks more US assurances before restoring NATO supplies
Media: Pakistan Today
Byline: N/A
Date: 18 April 2012
ISLAMABAD - The Defence Committee of the Cabinet (DCC) late on Tuesday decided to put on hold reopening of the supply routes for NATO troops stationed in Afghanistan as civil military leadership agreed that the announcement would only be made after an apology from the US administration with some more assurances from the Obama administration that action would be taken against those officials involved in Salala attacks, Pakistan Today learnt on Tuesday.
The DCC, which met with Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gilani in the chair and attended by leading ministers and services chiefs, took a detailed overview of the recommendations made by the Parliamentary Committee on National Security (PCNS) and the outcome of formal and informal interactions between the civil and military
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794298 Date: 02/13/2016

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794298 Date: 02/13/2016
bureaucracy with the US administration. It was another DCC meeting held in November last which had decided to block NATO supply routes soon after US forces attacked two Pakistani checkposts in Mohmand Agency killing 24 troops. A source told Pakistan Today that Pakistan had been informally conveyed that though the US administration would offer a formal apology on the Salala attack, no action would be taken against the responsible army officials of US/NATO as the incident was a result of "miscommunication" and "misunderstanding" on both sides.
"The DCC also discussed the outcome of the US visit by Finance Minister Hafeez Shaikh and it was decided that any decision of NATO supplies would be taken keeping in view the outcome of talks of Hafeez Shaikh, who is in Washington for talks with US officials," the source added. The DCC decided that a work plan would be developed for effective implementation of parliamentary guidelines based on Pakistan's national interests and this work plan would be meant for reopening of the NATO supply routes after some more understanding and assurances from the US sides with more communication between both the sides. Addressing the participants of the meeting, the prime minister said a roadmap for reengagement with the US, negotiation of new terms and conditions for resumption of the Ground Lines of Communication (GLOCs), joint counterterrorism cooperation, greater inter-agency coordination, transparency in US diplomatic and intelligence footprint in Pakistan, strengthening of border sec urity and non-use of Pakistan's territory for attacks on other countries and expulsion of al foreign fighters from Pakistan's territory, are our fundamental policy parameters.
The DCC also offered prayers for the brave officers and soldiers of the Pakistan Army who remain trapped in an avalanche in Siachen and decided to declare Friday, April 20 as Youm-e-Dua. The meeting also decided to appeal to the nation to observe the coming Friday as Youm-e-Dua for the safety and wellbeing of Pakistan Army soldiers and civilians. The DCC discussed the guidelines approved by parliament on April 12 with regard to the foreign and security policies.
The DCC reaffirmed that there would be no compromise on Pakistan's nuclear programme and agreed that the government might pursue the aim of international civilian nuclear cooperation. It was agreed that parliamentary review and oversight would not only give public ownership to the country's foreign and security policies but also help strengthen the hands of the government in dealing with the international community of great national importance. The DCC strongly condemned the recent terrorist attacks in Kabul and other Afghan cities and reaffirmed Pakistan's support for an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned inclusive peace and reconciliation process.
In the opening statement, the prime minister said the DCC's meeting was convened to consider the recommendations of parliament that were finalised on April 12. The parliamentary review process was an unprecedented development and marks a new milestone in the progress along the path of democracy, the prime minister said.
He stated relations with the US/NATO/ISAF were put on hold until parliament took a clear position on how to proceed forward under the new terms of engagement.
In my view, Gilani said the parliamentary review and oversight would not only give public ownership to our foreign and security policies but also help strengthen the hands of the government in dealing with the international community on issues of greater national importance.
Secondly, he said the exercise had given the nation a unique opportunity to set right our bilateral relationship with the US on the basis of mutual respect and mutual interest.
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794298 Date: 02/13/2016

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794298 Date: 02/13/2016
"The message from parliament -- yes to partnership but not at the cost of our sovereignty, carefully calibrates the road map of the engagement," the prime minister said.
"We now need to move beyond review adding that during the course of the concluding debate he assured the House that it will be his government's endeavour to implement parliament's recommendations with regard to our foreign and security policies both in letter and spirit." END

REN DON Media News Alert Notice:

This RENDON Media News Alert is distributed on behalf of contract # W9113M-07-D-006-0061 via a controlled

distribution list and is intended for DL-NSC-WHSR

It may not be further distributed to a bulk

mailing list, placed on a website/web portal, inserted into an RSS feed, or disseminated by other means of

mass distribution due to legal restrictions. If you were forwarded this message, you are subject to the same

bulk dissemination/mass distribution restrictions.

B6

* The original recipient is currently subscribed to alert-pakistan as: DL-NSC-WHSR
* To subscribe to alert-pakistan, please send a request with your title and contact information to: alert@rendon.com
* To unsubscribe, please reply to this email with "REMOVE ME from alert-pakistan" in the subject line.

UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05794298 Date: 02/13/2016

